# John Conway's Game of Life - Implementation by Kera Linn
### Background Info:  

The Game of Life is a computer simulation known as a cellular automaton (automaton singular, automata plural). Essentially it is a way to present mathematical models of complex systems.   

John Conway built his rules off the work of John Von Nuemann, who was trying to model a type of machine that could self-replicate, and determined that such a machine could be represented by a 2-dimensional array of cells (a grid).   

Thus the Game of Life is a repetitive program calculating infinite 'generations' of cells, wherein the cells are 'alive' or 'dead' depending on the previous generation's configuration.   

Eventually the simulation will run into an generation where there will no longer be any changes to future generations or the pattern will simply oscillate. This is because they satisfy all of the existential rules.   

### Rules:

John Conway simplified the mathematical concepts to a set of rules that each generation iterates through:   

1. Any living cell in the current universe with less than 2 living neighbors dies in the next generation as if by under-population.   
2. Any living cell with more than 3 living neighbors will die in the next generation as if by over-population.  
3. Any living cell with 2 or 3 living neighbors will live on into the next generation.   
4. Any dead cell with exactly 3 living neighbors will be born into the next generation as if by reproduction. 


## Basic Program Setup
* You have a grid of any size.
* Cells that are alive are a darker color than dead cells.
* Each cell has a number within detailing the number of neighbors (the surrounding 8 cells) that are alive, not including itself. If there are no alive neighbors, no number is displayed within the cell.
* Boundaries of the grid (edges) are either Finite or Toroidal. Finite is where the edge of the grid is the edge of the 'universe.' Toroidal means that the universe is wrapped, that is, when reaching the edge of the grid, the cell's alive/dead status affects the appropriate cells on the opposite edge.
* The bottom edge of the window lists the current Generation, how many cells are currently alive, and the type of boundary (finite or toroidal). This information is also displayed in the Heads Up Display (HUD) in the lower left corner of the grid.
* The initial generation can be generated by one of the following ways:
   1. Clicking various cells to turn them on in any desired pattern.
   2. Clicking the Randomize tab will allow you to randomize from Seed or from Time. From Seed allows you to enter a number that will generate a random pattern. From Time produces a random pattern automatically without input.
   
## Game Controls
### Top Toolbar - File:
+ New - Clears the board completely.
+ Open - Allows you to select and open previously-saved files of .cells extension.
+ Save - Save the current generation as a .cells file.
+ Exit - Closes the window.
### View:
+ HUD - Turns on/off the heads-up-display of Generations, Alive count, and Boundary Type that displays over the grid in the lower left corner.
+ Neighbor Count - Turns on/off the number within the cells displaying the number of alive neighbors.
+ Grid - Turns on/off the grid outlines.
+ Toroidal - Select to change Boundary Type to Toroidal.
+ Finite - Select to change Boundary Type to Finite.
### Run:
+ Start - Begins running the program through the generations. The count will continue until stopped.
+ Pause - Stops the program in the current generation.
+ Next - Moves the program forward 1 generation only.
### Randomize:
+ From Seed - Allows you to enter a number that will generate a random starting pattern.
+ From Time - Produces a random starting pattern without input.
### Settings:
+ Background Color - Allows you to change the background color for dead cells.
+ Cell Color - Allows you to change the background color for alive cells.
+ Grid Color - Allows you to change the color for the gridlines.
+ Options - Opens a dialog box to change the Timer Interval (how quickly it cycles through generations), and the size of the Universe.
+ Reset - Sets all colors back to default. This does NOT affect the size of the universe.
+ Reload - Clears the board to view. 


### Second Toolbar - Icons
These icons perform the same function as the action under the menus of the top toolbar. From left-to-right:
+ New - Clears the board completely.
+ Open - Allows you to select and open previously-saved files of .cells extension.
+ Save - Save the current generation as a .cells file.
+ Start - Begins running the program through the generations. The count will continue until stopped.
+ Pause - Stops the program in the current generation.
+ Next - Moves the program forward 1 generation only.


### Click Functions
+ Left-click individual cells to turn them on/off.
+ Right-click within the grid to access color settings and the options dialog without going to the Settings tab of the top toolbar.

## Customizations

The program allows for some customization. You can change the color of the backgrounds/grid; turn on/off the HUD, Neighbor Count, and Grid; change the boundary type; adjust the grid size; and adjust how quickly the program proceeds through the new generations.


Original Creation Notes
------
This project was originally created during the Project 1: Computer Science and Portfolio 1: Computer Science classes during Sept-Oct 2021. These classes were taken as part of the Computer Science Certificate program at Full Sail University.
